Hello. my name is Mike Myers. and I play
Austin Powers and Dr. Evil. and I wrote
the movie Austin Powers
International Man of
Mystery. and I'm also
one of the producers.
My name is Jay Roach. and I directed the
film Austin Powers.
Hi. Jay.
Eric's boy is the name of my production
company. named after my father. Eric.
We shot this in the Valley of Fire near
Las Vegas.
Ladies and gentlemen. welcome to my
underground lair.
There's that cat.
That's me. Dr. Evil.
This idea of shooting
Dr. Evil without seeing
his face obviously was
derived from Thunderball.
That lady on the far right
is a meter maid. because
we're trying to think
of people who are evil.
Now she's on the far left.
We got away without
showing the pits these guys
fall into. but we would have
if we'd had more money.
The stunt guy was Bud Davis. stunt
coordinator.
Some people might notice that the doctor
and the hookman are twins.
That's Will Ferrell. yay. Will. from
Saturday Night Live. and Mindy Sterling.
Of the groundlings who
trained. many famous
comedians. as well as
being a great one herself.
I frequently wear that pinky ring.
And those pants. I've seen them.
This was kind of the introduction of
Austin's color world. and there's a big
clash with the black
and whites and grays and
silvers of Dr. Evil. and
that's very intentional.
The original writing of this sequence came
very late in the scripting process.
after I saw the movie Sweet Charity.
and I heard the song Soul Bossa Nova.
So this wasn't in any of the first drafts
of the movie.
This song kind of revolutionized the whole
feel of the movie in a lot of ways.
even in pre-production before we shot it.
because it just added a whole great vibe.
Quincy Jones from 1962.
Soul Bossa Nova.
Great. baby. yeah!
Oh. behave.
That was the ugliest. or how should I say.
that was the worst of three sets of teeth.
We'll talk about the teeth later.
This is. of course. the shot from Hard
Day's Night.
This one was also derived from Hard Day's
Night.
This whole scene was shot
in the back lot at Paramount.
and the choreographer
was Marguerite Derricks.
She becomes more important in a little
while. and Mike starts dancing.
That was Mike's idea to pan over and
discover him behind one of the magazines.
That was a cool shot.
Now we come to my favorite shot in the
whole movie.
The flipping bobbies.
And this big dance number.
Mike tells me they don't
have high school blast
bands in England. but
nobody seems to mind.
No. they don't have marching bands.
Oh. is that what it is?
Yeah. they have brass bands. but it's
usually like. you know. miners.
you know. coal miners have a brass band in
high school.
Ah. the jag.
Yes.
Mr. Bud Davis. stunt coordinator.
ladies and gentlemen.
Mike had the idea of he jumps into the
car. and I think it was Bud who came up
with the idea of the front flip.
and I didn't believe it could be done.
And that guy did it for us like six times
by the end of the movie.
And I thought he was going to hurt his
bits and pieces. but he didn't.
He came within two inches of that.
Yes. I know.
So this is all rear
screen. which was very
intentional to give us
the look of an old 60s film.
Mr. Michael York. ladies and gentlemen.
And that optical is a true optical.
much like the old films. instead of using
video playback. which they always do in
the 90s. we went for a true film optical.
Pacific Title did all the opticals and
titles for us.
Ah. the big boy.
I'm swinging London. by the way.
All of this neon and the big boy were
added to that building. which was on the
Paramount lot by Dave Johnson's company.
Pacific Vision.
That's my bum.
Using CGI.
This is my fabulous bum.
Mimi Rogers looking better than ever in
that leather fight suit.
Yes. the leather fight suit was a big hit
amongst the crew members.
Somebody told me she took this job just to
wear that suit.
Well. she's a very smart woman.
Dina Appel did the costumes.
Amazing job.
I think she should be nominated for an
Academy Award.
That was a fun day. a lot of dancing.
We did about 40 takes of dancing.
There's Andy Warhol.
And there's Jay Roach's favorite shot
ever.
I had to fight like crazy
to get my credit over
that shot and the way
we put this together.
Mike doesn't realize it. but
we changed the whole order of
this scene just so I could
have my name all over that shot.
I don't mind. Jay.
Remember the guy who almost lost his eye?
Mimi Rogers poked this guy from the three
stooges right in the eye.
We thought his eye was going to come out.
We thought we had made somebody partially
blind in the name of comedy.
But he was the brave stuntman.
Finished the scene.
You can see his knickers in that jump.
I hope people realize that we switched the
girl to the guy.
Do you think they figured that out?
Yes.
That leather suit is hard to run in.
She told us.
There's Mr. Bigglesworth.
And now comes the shot we hate.
That sign.
We hate those doors so much.
That's the lamest lettering ever created
for a film.
You put those sparks on to try to hide
them.
And if you notice. I'd
never shot a gun in a
movie before. so I'm
blinking on every shot.
If you freeze-frame. Mike's eyes close
almost every time the gun flashes.
which started to be kind of a cool
character trait.
This is a cool shot.
All this stuff is CGI.
Again. Dave Johnson did an amazing job
mimicking the Apollo 13 launch shots.
Those shots were derived from Apollo 13
shots.
And there's Mr. Bigglesworth.
Like that Garfield on board.
I love these little retro rocket bursts
that take him back into re-entry.
The re-entry heat things.
I'm very fond of the typing.
I'm very glad that... Ah!
Clint Howard!
Yay!
Mike spotted this effect in the Thomas
Crown Affair.
Again. an old-fashioned
film optical. which we both
fell in love with and did
a lot throughout the film.
And Charles Napier is the colonel.
The classic colonel.
I love how. like. only for our purposes
does the radar blip look like Bob's big boy.
Nowhere in life does that ever happen.
That always gets a huge laugh when Bob
comes on.
The silhouette of Bob.
Clint's reprising his role from Apollo 13
here as well.
He's very cool. very funny.
So is Mr. Napier.
Sir.
This is the 60s overuse of split screen.
Again. a la Thomas Crown Affair.
If you watch. we had to adjust a little
bit of the pacing on Charles.
Yeah. you can see the cuts in him.
yeah.
Using film opticals.
I'm a big fan of whenever you show England
that you play Royal Britannia.
That is a rule.
Whenever they go to China. it's always...
And whenever they have Indians.
it's always...
It's just the law.
And we're law-abiding filmmakers.
A lot of this look was
derived from Stanley
Kubrick's 2001.
especially that first big shot.
When you walk into the hallway.
The ultimate gentleman spy.
That's me holding my bits and pieces.
Mike's wearing a Merkin.
That's right. I am.
For those of you who know what that is.
He could stand there
and hold still in an
absolute frozen pose for
like a minute and a half.
It's incredible.
This was cool.
It was like going into amniotic fluid.
going into this goo.
He's actually descending into that methyl
cellulose stuff.
And we had to hold him under because he
would become buoyant and float to the top.
But it actually became quite relaxing
after a while.
It was very amniotic.
It was kind of like one of those saline
isolation tanks.
Is that what you said?
Yeah.
And at one of the shots. my boys popped
through.
You can see my boys pop through from
behind.
We couldn't use that shot
because I am completely
naked there covered
in red dye number two.
Stage four.
Cleansing beginning.
I always look like a chick hatching from
an egg in that shot to me.
Now when you say chick...
I don't mean bird.
Okay. I understand.
I'm hip to your street lingo. Jay.
This is pretty shamelessly stolen from
Sleeper.
I've always loved that film as an example
of how style can be funny.
And this whole look. this
symmetry and the color scheme
and the vibe of this was really
influenced by Woody Allen.
There's a tremendous pressure
on us from people who will
go nameless who thought
that the pee went on too long.
And that is my favorite thing in comedy
which is comedy torture when something
stops being funny and then becomes funny
again.
Plus it was completely
motivated by the fact
that you've been a
Sleeper for 30 years.
How long of a pee would you take after
that?
Exactly.
It is a universal experience.
Everybody has a morning pee.
And if you've been a sexual
Rip Van Winkle like I am.
your morning pee is going
to last a good 48 seconds.
It is the longest pee on film.
I'm pretty sure.
Yeah. I looked it up.
It is.
I made some calls.
I just love Borshevsky. the General.
Ilya Baskin. his looks are priceless.
We could have cut a whole film of reaction
shots.
In fact. we thought about doing this whole
film just as reaction shots where you
would never see the
person actually speaking. just
cut to their face of the
people who are listening.
That's from watching dailies. endless
dailies.
I'm a big believer in action shots.
I drove the studio crazy I think shooting
two men in one.
The shouting is a temporary sight.
The hair is... they put
glue on my chest and
then they meticulously
put this hair on me.
And I was like a yak all day.
And it starts to stink by the end of the
day.
Because the glue and my body odor and just
like food gets caught in this stuff.
I turned into this animal.
I turned into Sasquatch.
It was going to be worse.
We. for a while. thought about putting it
on his back and all over his shoulders.
But our wives talked us out of it.
They said. no way. nobody is going to see
the movie with that hair on your back.
I mean. I do look yak-like. you got to
admit.
I love Ilya's reactions. the Russians'
reactions during this whole scene.
Just kill me.
And remember one of
the notes is that the clips
are on and then they're
off in some of the shots.
Yeah. the gaff squad will be tracking
those ear clips for a long time.
And here comes Elisabeth Hurley.
I wrote the part and Jay and I both sort
of like early in the scripting phase.
We wrote this for Elisabeth Hurley.
Because. you know. obviously she's...
And. you know. she's English and we
thought she was great.
And Jay and I had seen her interviewed and
thought she was ultimately charming.
And she was just awesome in the movie.
came with great ideas and we had a blast.
She actually came up with this whole idea
of doing a kind of softer. earnest...
you know. English private school girl as
opposed to just the kind of harsh 90s woman.
And she actually added a layer of that
which I always loved.
She's very charming. she's Julie Christie
of the 90s. that's what I always say.
Yeah. she was... we had so much fun making
this movie.
She had so much respect for your lines.
Mike.
She would memorize them. you know.
she just was so...
English people. English actors are like
this for some reason.
They just. you know. revere the script.
And she was very. very respectful of it.
Thanks.
Danger Powers personal effects.
Actually. my name is Austin Powers.
This guy here is my... this is Neil
Malarkey. playing the clerk.
And he was my comedy partner in England
for two years.
He's an awesome. awesome. awesome
comedian.
When I lived in England. he was my
partner.
We were Malarkey and Myers.
For a couple of years. right?
Male symbol.
One pair of Italian boots.
What did we cut out?
We cut an item out of this.
Was it the purple socks?
Yeah.
The purple tie-dyed socks. right?
I think so.
Or frilly lace cravat.
No. the cravat's still there. but the
purple tie-dyed socks didn't make the cut.
The penis pump made it. though.
Which I'm happy to see.
He even makes it on TV ads and stuff.
I mean. I couldn't believe they've been
able to use that.
It's actually really funny.
I just love that there's a flag of Sweden
on it. as if that's...
That's movie proof.
It's Swedish. see?
There's a flag of Sweden.
In the TV version. it's just the enlarger
pump.
Yes.
As if you can't tell what it's supposed to
enlarge.
Now. this is one of my most satisfying
things ever. that this got a big laugh.
That's a great graphic.
Bruce Mink did all these mock-ups for
these props. and he did a great job.
Yeah. and in no time at all. too.
He did such an awesome job.
Mike was so used to. on Saturday Night
Live. asking for props at the last minute.
and Bruce. although he would
always have this funny look on
his face when we'd ask him.
would just always come up with it.
It was amazing.
And then. of course. is Burt Bacharach.
which is the inspiration for this movie.
because I was driving home from hockey
practice. and I heard The Look of Love by
Burt Bacharach on the radio. and I just
wanted to do a movie in that whole.
you know. not the hippie 60s. but the
jet-setter. swinger 60s. the more English.
you know. the casino royales. and that
whole. you know. blow-up.
And do a movie in that area.
And so. Mr. Burt Bacharach. who will
appear later in the cinematic offering.
is there in album form.
These were inspired by Laugh-In.
the TV show Laugh-In.
We called them the psychedelic scene
breaks.
And originally we had like 25
in them. then we went down to
none. then we had like 10. and
now I think there's how many?
There's four. yeah.
And they're titles like It's a Gas and
Sock It to Me.
And Groovy Baby.
Let's explain the cat.
The cat's name is Ted Nude-Gent.
That's his real name.
Ted. and I fell in love
with this cat. and
that's a breed of cat.
It was born that way. we didn't shave it.
No nair was used in the production.
in the making of this movie.
We did. however. shave Mike Myers' head.
Yes. that is a shaved hand.
I used to have to get my head shaved every
day.
I have blue contacts in.
and make-up applications.
and elongated nose
and elongated ears.
This is the first time we see his face in
the movie.
The character is based on Donald
Pleasence.
Blofeld.
And. you know. a combination of all the
different James Bond fiat guys.
The suit's a little bit from Dr. No.
Blofeld from... is it You Only Live Twice?
Yeah.
I love how those things in the foreground
match his bald head.
Symmetrical echoes of your cranial
physique.
The voice is Doug Aronowski. our first AD.
The voice on the other end of the line.
Otherwise known as Doug Arnie Okoski.
Is that his real name?
You shot me!
Okay. moving on.
You shot me right in the arm!
Look at Ted in this scene.
Throughout this whole
burn scene. Ted is
watching the place where
we needed him to watch.
He had the perfect
eyeline to establish the
illusion that there really
was a pit down there.
Ted the cat.
I love that cat so much.
It was like holding somebody's ass in your
hands.
Because it was very. very warm.
It was bizarrely warm.
Or how I understand it is to hold
somebody's ass.
Help?
Mindy's character. Frau Farbison.
was partly inspired by Rosa Krebs. is it?
Rosa Kleb.
From the Bond films.
And a little bit from Frau Blucher.
I guess.
Frau Blucher?
From Young Frankenstein.
But Mindy added the element of the
shouting.
This guy is awesome.
Paul Dillon.
Paul Dillon did an amazing job.
And I got a Lucky Charms joke in.
which makes me happy.
The angry Irishman thing.
Bruce came up with the idea. we always
thought of it as Lucky Charms.
charms. silver charms. at least I did.
And Bruce actually
came up with the idea of
actually coloring them
just like the cereal.
Making them hearts. moons. clovers.
and blue diamonds.
The sound guys came up with that great
jingle that it makes so that later when he
comes to get Austin. you hear it as he
tells it.
Now this thing is all improvised by Mindy
Sterling.
This whole run about Lucky Charms and the
little man and he runs.
This is all because of her background.
She's one of the best improvisers I've
ever seen in my life.
And she totally just came up with this.
This was on the day.
It was your idea to
use this silent reaction.
Mike. and I always
howl when I see that.
Her face when that cut is cracked up.
And here we come to RJ. Mr. Robert Wagner.
who is a hero.
He's just classic.
That's the word to describe Robert Wagner.
He was so awesome.
So we had to come up with a classic shot
to introduce him just walking his feet
down those stairs and coming up to that
eyepatch face.
He's the most precise prop spiker.
You know. placing props and using props.
He just does it over and over exactly the
same way.
It's amazing.
That's an easy skill to underestimate.
A lot of this whole thing of how the world
doesn't work and all that stuff.
I called my friend...
Oh. this was improvised.
The pulling of the chair. that was all
improvised.
And came in very late in the editorial
process.
It was hysterical on the day. but we
forgot about it.
And the editor went back through and dug
it up in the middle of the preview process.
And the next time it previewed.
it just got howls.
Jack Handy generously gave me a couple of
jokes in this whole area.
Dr.
Evil is a guy who was so
happy in the 50s when world
domination and being a
square was relatively cool.
And my thing with him always
was. he just was really pissed
off when the 60s happened
because it ruined his parade.
And Austin represented the worst side of
too much color. too much
free-spiritedness. too much sex.
too much hair.
I should like to point out. as a vain
actor. that that suit is heavily padded.
This is my favorite time of shooting.
I think. for the whole movie.
Because Jay had built into the schedule
time to improvise.
And a lot of how much fun it is.
is that while 70% of it was scripted.
30% I was allowed to just sort of go and
be free.
This was a real fun time.
We just got crew that could move fast and
adjust to changes very quickly.
And that was important.
I knew Mike would do some of his best
stuff on the fly.
And we just had to make sure there was a
lot of film in the camera.
And precious. precious things came out of
Mike's performance in these scenes.
For some reason. Mike. when you go into
Dr. Evil. an unusual lucidity happens.
a flow that you have in other characters.
But it's just amazing as Dr. Evil.
It always blew me away.
Oh. thanks.
I have an earpiece.
People are feeding me lines.
It's the Marlon Brando adjustment.
I thought you were saying
that those earlobes that we
attached to that was
probably just those weird lobes.
The makeup took like an hour and a half to
two hours every morning.
One of the funniest lines was. I'm the
boss. need the info. throw me a bone here.
I don't think any of those were scripted.
Throw me a frickin' bone here.
All came out on the day.
Now this is. they just did such a great
job with the exterior of the jet.
We were inspired a bit by the Hugh Hefner
syndrome of you're as cool as your jet.
Where did the finger thing come from.
Mike. the Dr. Evil finger thing?
Just. you know. all great bad guys have
some sort of affectation.
But isn't that what being an international
man of mystery is all about?
Okay. name. Austin Danger Powers.
Sex?
Yes. please.
How does a hot chick like you end up
working...
So the jet is Austin's lair preserved.
I always hoped that we could afford to
make it all white fur.
We watched a film
called Danger Diabolique.
where the guy had a
huge white spinning bed.
You know. and would make loved women
covered with money.
But we couldn't afford to do it exactly
that way.
I remember I was very against the pumpkin
jacket.
And gave in.
We called it pumpkin because Mike hates
orange.
Yes. I hate orange.
I hate the number three and I hate orange.
You see. I'm insane.
Just a ribbon. yeah.
One of the cool things about this movie
was...
trying to mythologize Austin Powers and
give him this whole legendary status...
by giving him a certain kind of women.
a certain kind of transportation...
having people chase him all around and
revere him.
And that was actually a blast.
We really loved this character.
I mean. obviously Mike loved him.
but I really. really loved this character.
..
and tried to embrace him.
And not just parody characters like him.
but pay tribute to characters like this...
and to Austin in particular.
Do I make you horny?
It was the first scene we shot in the
movie.
It was the first day.
First scene. first day.
And there were a lot of things we were
just getting used to.
But I love the performances.
I love what you do with the spinning bed.
And I loved her performance right here when
she jumps off the bed and lectures you.
Because it could have easily gotten too
harsh and predictable.
She really is just totally charming.
even as she's cussing you out.
I thought it was great.
Can I just say that I've never said
cussing you out ever in my life?
What's your point. Vanessa?
This is the Mike Flowers pops.
A kind of faux lounge band that's very
popular in England.
This was all improvised.
We just turn on that bed and let Mike do
what he does.
And that's some of my favorite footage in
the whole movie.
This is an interesting
scene because this
scene was actually
tied into the other scene.
And this scene was the first time you see
all these people. and it got cut in two.
I don't know how interesting that was.
actually.
I'm backpedaling now.
Well. it's interesting in that it's one of
my favorite cuts in the movie to cut to
her saying. Remember when we froze your
semen?
Because it just comes so far out of the
blue.
Yeah. because that's my favorite
introduction to any scene.
Remember when we froze your semen?
God. if I had a nickel for
every time I started a scene
with Remember when we froze
your semen. I'd have 30 cents.
Seth Green did a great job with this
character.
I love the Kurt Cobain t-shirt.
Yeah. he came to play.
He's a cool guy. Seth.
Give me a hug.
No.
No way.
This was all improvised. this whole
relationship.
I mean. there were scripted lines. but
Mike made up all this stuff. including.
..
The Macarena.
Which was a song we played on
the set to cheer us up. you know.
in the times when things were
going too slow or something.
And Mike and the sound guy
had a joke about it and would
always blast over the speakers
at the least opportune time.
Exactly.
When we were. like.
bored or waiting on a light
or something. I'd go. I
think it's Macarena time!
Although we probably have
to edit this out of the tape.
because it technically can't
be... It's a Macarena-like song.
And legally we found out that it isn't
Macarena.
So any of you nerds out there who want to
sue us. we've already been down this path.
This is a great song.
Mascanada.
Was it just performed
by Brazil 66. or was it
actually written by
the guy from that band?
I can't remember.
Me either.
I just like it.
It is a great song.
It's so Vegas.
This was a fun night.
This was actually shot in Vegas.
We shot in both the Riviera. which is
where Casino was shot. and the Stardust.
That exterior was from the Stardust.
Now this is a scene that was in and out
about. what. five times.
It was in the movie and then out of the
movie.
I'm glad it stayed. because it again defines
the job she has in a really funny way.
I also like that I got to say
undercarriage.
Undercarriage is a bit of a how's your
father.
I hope you'll never explain
what how's your father
means. because it's just
funny to me that it's so odd.
People can barely understand what
undercarriage is. let alone how's your father.
That was inspired by my wife. those
individually bagged clothing items with labels.
She travels a lot.
And she's a little neurotic.
That's the second biggest gun I've ever
seen in my life.
Paging Dr. Freud.
And. alas. the penis pump.
What scene would be complete?
Now this scene actually went on for
another. like. ten minutes.
There was a whole thing
where you dialed up 777 film
and found out what that
was all about in the 90s.
It was really funny.
This was a fun night. too. because in
between shots we were gambling.
Remember. we were like...
It was hard keeping the crew
focused. because we'd turn
around and half of them
would be over at the slots.
I know. it was fun.
And winning. the camera
operator was like this
guy with a horseshoe
up his butt. as Mike says.
Which is really hard to pull somebody away
when they're on such a great streak.
And just remind them that we're actually
doing a motion picture.
Could you tweak this light?
We've got to shoot.
Hold on. hold on.
Ding. ding. ding. ding. ding. ding.
ding.
Now this. I will remember for the rest of
my life. was the noisiest.
Oh. my God.
Remember. they decided to reload the slot
machines during shooting. and suddenly
there was this clanging
and little trains going
by with silver dollars.
and it was a nightmare.
And RJ had a terrible cold. and we got to
his close-ups last. and the ultimate
professional and gentleman that he is.
he was totally like...
I mean. just look. and he's so awesome in
this scene.
That's Larry Thomas. the soup Nazi from
Seinfeld.
And Fabiana... Odenio.
Odenio. who plays a lot of vagina.
A lot of fagina.
Fagina.
At one time we thought about changing it
to a lot of clavage. but we realized we
were wimping out. and I
think that was me who said
that. and Mike wisely
insisted that it remained vagina.
A lot of vagina.
Clavage was funny too.
That's a good backup.
We just didn't know if it would be PG or
PG-13.
Now this is a weird joke.
because I would never have
thought that this would
have ever stayed in the movie.
Allow myself to introduce myself.
I always get a huge laugh.
I know. I'm so happy.
Look at that eye patch. look at RJ.
That white tux. I mean. that is so
beautiful.
It's so classic.
This was a fun night too.
This was like our second to last night.
right?
Yeah. I think the last night was on the
bus.
Yeah. this was the second to last.
But everyone was so tired.
We shot most of it at like 5
in the morning. because that
was the only time the casinos
were even vaguely quiet.
It was so noisy.
And everybody had a cold by the end of
this.
Everybody had a terrible flu. because we
were up all night.
It always makes me happy that people
understand enough about Blackjack to know
that when you stay on a 5. that is
actually kind of a strange choice.
You didn't happen to see anything at all?
This is a lot of people's favorite scene
in the movie.
Mike does this amazing job imitating
something that's not going on.
and Tom Arnold just came up with some of
the funniest stuff.
Yeah. Tom Arnold improvised and came up
with Courtesy Flush and Blowing an O-Ring.
Just all on his feet.
It was so great.
So much of it played so well on his face
too. just the reactions as he was
misinterpreting what was going on next
door.
I look very Partridge family there.
Now I'm English.
I love that line.
I look very Shirley Jones in that outfit.
I love that neither you nor he take off
your jackets before you sit down.
Well. this joke is rather self-evident.
isn't it?
He. of course. thinks
that I'm having a bowel
movement. and in fact
I'm fighting for my life.
This is a guilty pleasure.
I mean. I just thought it was funny.
In a way. it's the smartest bathroom humor
ever.
Yeah. that's it.
It's the smartest.
Yay for us.
Yay for us!
Because it's not really bathroom humor.
There's no actual bodily functions
occurring.
No. he just thinks there are.
That's the joke.
Food is number two.
Hey. that sounds pretty nasty.
I'm sure that turd is Boston scripted.
and that's awesome.
It's a huge laugh.
It's just funny to go
through the thing and tell
people at home what gets
big laughs and what doesn't.
They'd have no choice in the matter now.
You don't necessarily have to include
this.
Yeah. you're going to like this.
too.
You're going to like my ass being slapped.
I'm telling you.
The guy was hung upside down.
The stunt guy on that toilet all day long
did a great job.
Cynthia Charette designed these sets.
Martin Marvell was one of the designers.
too.
I always loved Dr. Evil's world.
We went for jagged corners and black.
shiny surfaces and greys.
My favorite shot in the movie was that one
because it's the thing in those 60s movies
where everybody's in their national
costume.
And because I'm from Canada. I wanted to
make sure there was a Mountie.
The trailer guys. the guys
who cut the preview for this
movie. actually helped us
with the sound effects on this.
I love that there's a big whoosh when the
camera zooms into his face.
I always thought there
would be a music sting.
but the whip sound
turned out to be the best.
There's Gorbachev on the right there.
We put the Israeli guy
with the guy from Egypt.
and it's a kind of
gesture for world peace.
Yeah. and I think we've done tremendously
for world peace by doing that.
We're only 100 billion dollars richer.
Now this was another scene
that there was a tremendous
amount of pressure on
us to make very. very short.
And we insisted on it being long.
I think it worked out okay.
I think it works out great.
I've always wondered what would happen.
You know. you always see the evil guy
laughing and stuff.
What happens when he's finished laughing?
What does he do?
How do you segue into new conversation?
It's like. okay. listen. who wants to go
watch some TV?
Mad About You's on.
Let's go see Mad About You.
You didn't.
Oh. God. no.
No.
I made her sleep on the sofa.
Vanessa.
Jay. you want to take this one?
Explain how this got done.
Originally it was scheduled for something
like two or three days.
And Mr. Roach came up with a way to do
this scene in basically a day. half a day.
Yeah. we shot it in a day.
We rehearsed a couple of times.
But the trick that ultimately
made it doable was placing
some hidden monitors around
the set with reverse scan.
So when Elizabeth looked into the monitor.
it was as if she were looking into a
mirror. and that enabled her to move
things.
But with two different eye lines.
so that it's clear that that's the thing
that sells it. is the two different eye
lines.
That's the part that is such a great idea.
When she looks around from monitor to
monitor. it kind of makes it feel like
she's just looking around
the room naturally. instead
of having her eyes fixated
on one monitor in particular.
He's handsome. witty. has a knowledge of
fine wines.
Sophisticated.
A world-renowned photographer.
Women want him. and men want to be him.
Every bit an international man of mystery.
You didn't answer my question.
mummy.
I know.
Let me just say this.
Again. one of my favorite jokes in the
piece is the sausage.
Ah. the sausage!
Paging Dr. Freud.
Do you want to speak?
We shot this numerous times. and Elizabeth
had to bite off the end of about 25
sausages. but... She's
English. and she didn't mind.
She got through it.
Originally. we were going to do it all in
one take. and actually fulfilled that.
We shot the whole thing
once. all the way through.
without any goof-ups or any
naughty bits showing through.
But ended up deciding that it worked
better cut back to Mrs. Kensington.
And this is a scene. too. the joke with
the pussycat. that we had to shorten the
length of time between pussy and cat in
order to get a PG-13.
Which is so asinine when you think about
it.
They used to say. I
never forget a pussy... Cat.
Pussycat.
And then we had to go. never forget a
pussycat.
We only made. like. three changes for
them. and that was one of them.
I guess they were just...
Well. it is so innocent.
I mean. this isn't a dirty movie.
This was the last night of shooting.
It was just such a magical night.
having Burt Bacharach up on this bus.
driving up and down the Strip in Vegas all
night. and people literally standing in
awe as we rode by. and what the world
needs now.
Blasting from the speakers so Burt could
sing along with it.
This was cool.
This was the perfect way to end the movie.
After every take. in Daly's.
you can see Mike and
Elizabeth go over and sit
down on the piano and hug Burt.
And it was partly funny. but it was partly
sincere.
It was just like having a deity on this
bus with us.
We all revered him so much.
He was so awesome.
He was so into it. too.
He was up all night long. flew in just for
us. and left immediately afterwards.
Off to see his racehorses and stuff. and
he was right there. just completely Burt.
But that night was my favorite heckle.
because as the bus was going by.
somebody on the street. this drunken idiot
starts shouting. Hey!
Drink beer!
Just drink it!
I said to him. that's your heckle?
Drink beer?
Hey!
Drink beer!
Oh. go on. Austin.
Get on with it.
Do you want me to do it?
Oh. go on.
Yes!
Right hand green!
Oh. no!
Is Twister still a game?
Can you still buy Twister?
No. there's laws prohibiting it.
Oh. you know what?
Wait a tick. I forgot something in the
lobby.
People always wonder
if there's any trick here.
other than just Mike
doing this. and there isn't.
He's behind that couch. just using his
legs to make this happen.
It's the going down the stairs.
which was invented by Mr. Dick Van Dyke.
ladies and gentlemen.
I think he did it on an episode of Dick
Van Dyke. and I tried hours and hours to
try to learn how to do it. and I used to
live in a co-op housing in Toronto.
and there was a center court. and I used
to do this to make girls laugh.
When we previewed in Westwood.
the film broke. and the audience was
trapped. and we were terrified that it was
going to ruin the preview. and Mike went
down in front and did these live.
spontaneously. for the audience.
and they freaked out.
This is one of the most special scenes in
the film for me. because you really get a
great glimpse into the heart of Austin
Powers. and part of it is that you get it
through her eyes. which is why the
relationship was so important to us.
We knew that if we could fall in love with
him through her eyes. that you have an
access to Austin that would
give him license to be as
outrageous as he wanted
to be all the rest of the time.
And the warmth that the montage and the
night with Bird on the bus bring into this
scene just perfectly sets up that she's
actually falling in love with this guy.
And then. of course. he undercuts it at
the end with. that train has sailed.
The glasses is a combination of some of
the stuff that Peter Sellers did.
and also Michael Caine. in all those 60s
movies.
They always had those National Health
Service of Britain glasses.
And. of course. the mutton chops.
the side boards. sideburns.
Very 60s. by the way.
And the teeth are very English.
Yes.
Well. you know what they say. Britain won
the war and lost their teeth.
They're dentally challenged.
We had three sets of them.
A real ghastly set for close-ups.
all the way down to a kind of.
for comedy close-ups. to a kind of sweet
set that we used in the romantic scene so
that girls wouldn't cringe as she kissed
him.
You've got mail.
I only put this in so I could
get a free year subscription
to AOL. which has worked
out great for both of us.
There's Mr. York.
Now. this was a really happy accident.
that the exterior of the Imperial Palace
matches the interior of this
place that was a filtration...
it was in the middle of a
filtration park or something.
They had a little park
to kind of dress up
the front of this sewage
treatment facility.
I know.
It stunk so bad.
In Van Nuys. right near the airport.
so planes are flying by. it stinks real
bad. Mike's hair is dissolving into the
hot tub. Austin's hair.
But then we went to Vegas and
we happened to find a location
to match the rice paper look
of the Japanese penthouse.
It was just a constant state of.
hello. hello.
Just total planes on every shot.
Every single line had to be re-dubbed.
They flew in so close
you could hear their
radio talking back and
forth through the tower.
It was amazing.
Every plane in Southern California flew
over that day.
It was like we were being attacked.
I was just trying to remember the lines
that we didn't use here.
This shot was inspired by one of my
favorite shots in film history.
the graduate shot looking under the leg of
Anne Bancroft at Dustin Hoffman.
It took us like three hours to get her to
hit exactly that Mark.
It was a very. very precise Mark.
This is very reminiscent of Casino Royale
with Peter Sellers and Ursula Andress.
There's versions of that scene that would
have totally killed our PG-13.
We actually see a lot of vagina.
I peed in that bath. by the way.
I just thought now's the time to come
clean.
Come in. and I'll show you everything you
need to know.
This was improvised as well. the getting
out of the clothes.
That hair.
That hair was the bane of my existence.
The glue in the hair just stunk so bad at
the end of the day.
Glue. hair. and B.O.
are a deadly combo. and food.
By the end of that shoot. that water was
sort of a sickly green with...
With a slick on it.
With a slick and just gobs of hair.
Hair and glue was foul.
And they had to keep being sexy and
seductive.
I smelled so bad.
Such B.O.
Nice.
It was a bit of a trick preserving the
PG-13 through this.
You could never tell when the water was
going to slosh a certain way.
She was a good sport about it.
Yeah. she was great.
Men come first and women come second.
Oh. sometimes not at all.
Care for some sake?
These were the class 10 teeth here.
These were the utmost.
Some people say. does she say care for
some sake?
That's what I got.
A lot of that.
No. it's sake. in fact.
And now we're coming up to another great
moment in the movie.
And here we are.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you.
You're very kind.
How dare you break wind before me?
The great thing about the
script for me was that there was
room for some really smart
humor. particularly with Dr. Evil.
But because of Austin's character.
we had license to do some of the most
primitive humor you could possibly
imagine.
What Mike always called the reptilian
humor as compared with the mammalian.
Thank you.
What exactly do you do at night.
Chico?
I will tell you all in due time.
But first...
There's a whole backstory
to that fart in the mouth
that got cut out. which makes
it seem even more random.
There's a whole thing that we went through
all of the stuff of being unfrozen.
you know. short-term memory loss. dry
mouth. you know. inopportune flatulence.
There's like this whole thing that just
got cut out.
So by the time we got to it. you just
looked insane that he farted in the tub.
Battle Exposition used to... Michael
York's character used to explain to Mike
as he was being unthawed
that flatulence at times
of extreme relaxation
were one of the side effects.
So that was going to set up
what happened in the hot tub
later. but ultimately it
didn't seem to be necessary.
It's a fart joke.
And America. I'm sorry.
You keep saying you've got something for
me.
We knew that the best way for Austin to
have to fight his way into the underground
lair in the end of the movie
would be to fight through
things that would take
advantage of his weaknesses.
And since he had a weakness for women.
Dr. Evil has Ralph Arbison invent the
Fembots. which is
partly inspired by Castle
Anthrax in the Monty
Python movie. The Holy Grail.
Well. really it's the Dean Martin
Ambushers and what was the other.
Matt Helm movies.
And the Iron Man Flint and then like
Flint. the James Coburn films.
That's sort of where the
character of the women. but
the idea of women knowing
exactly what his weakness was.
There was a lot of controversy
about those costumes. I remember.
because everybody thought
they looked like Barney Fife.
The cops costumes?
Yes. the Barney Fife costumes.
they came to be known.
But Mike thought that they would set you
in a period of films where all the cops
wore those costumes. and I think he's
absolutely right.
At ease. boys.
This is so funny. you have to get the
budget stretcher. and the makeshift
headquarters is the exact same as the
other room.
Just whipped on a British flag and some
military stuff.
It's the exact same.
It's the same hotel room
that we saw them unpack
in earlier. and it's not
clear whether it matters.
Some people think
that it is the same hotel
room and they just
brought in all the equipment.
I think either
interpretation is alright.
but it was supposed to
be two separate rooms.
We were hoping that people would notice
the room number.
No. it's a different number. see?
Like as if anyone cares.
Let me bring you up to speed.
Dr. Evil has hijacked a nuclear warhead
from Kremlakistan.
Only two things scare me. and one is
nuclear war.
This was a joke that was out at one point.
and put back in.
The carnies.
Carnies.
Small hands.
Circus folk.
Nomads. you know.
Smell like cabbage.
Small hands.
Oh. indeed.
Perhaps these photographs are the last
piece of the puzzle.
Aha.
I've uncovered the details of Project
Vulcan.
Oh. good God. an underground missile?
Austin. where did you find these?
Austin did some reconnaissance work last
night at Allotta Vagina's penthouse.
Our next move is to infiltrate first.
It's a good thing to
point out that this lady
that gets punched is a
professional stuntwoman.
And she was in no way
harmed. although on one of
the takes she did sort
of roll into that doorway.
A little hard. but she's a stuntwoman.
This is my mother.
We're laughing because it's just so hard.
It was very hard for me to direct this
scene. because just seeing her punched...
I mean. she was a
stuntwoman. but she obviously
was. you know. still a
sweet lady stuntwoman.
But she is actually moving her head.
I'm not doing any moving at all.
She's flicking her head
back to make it look like
I'm pulling on her hair.
because she's like...
She was the sweetest lady of all.
and we had to make it look like we were
really punching her and torturing her over
and over all night.
But she actually came
up at the end and thanked
us and was really.
really happy to do it.
No. she's a pro.
I mean. she knew what she was doing.
It's just an odd situation when you're
standing around on a set trying to figure
out how to make it look realistic. the
way her head snaps back and all that stuff.
That girl. Sarah. looks exactly like...
Goldie Hawn.
Goldie Hawn from Laughing.
We cast her to make that homage.
I love you. Dad.
I love you too. son.
And then. of course. we
have the wonderful Carrie
Fisher. who just knocked
us out of the park.
I thought she did a great job.
I found myself directing
her the way Gene Hackman
directed her character in
Postcards from the Edge.
She seemed to appreciate that.
Evil. actually.
Dr. Evil.
Hello. Dr. Evil.
Hello. Scott.
That guy was great. the guy on the left.
So. Scott. why don't we start with you?
This was always a controversial scene
because it was such a tangential kind of
left-field move. but once we put in the
sequence breaks and kind of established
license to go places. I thought the script
was really smart to have this departure
and to go off into this world of.
well. what is the henchman's...
I mean. what is Dr. Evil's life
like when his son comes into
it and what kind of relationship
would they really have?
I thought that was really. really smart.
You know. it's interesting.
I got a tennis ball in my hand because in
the early. early drafts of the movie.
the reason that Mustafa gets killed is
because my right arm was partially frozen.
like everything got frozen except my right
arm.
So it was like me constantly trying to get
my arm back in strength.
And of course. it doesn't make any sense
now that I've got this tennis ball.
We don't kill each other in here.
We might say that we do sometimes.
You might want to not put that into the
story.
Actually. the boy is quite astute.
I really am trying to kill him.
but...
We should just make up something that's
totally different.
The tennis ball was a part
of Dr. Evil's philosophy of
evil and it kind of goes
along with... It's the world.
The tennis ball is the world and he's
manipulating the world.
Yeah. that's it.
The details of my life are quite
inconsequential.
Oh. no. please. please.
Let's hear about your childhood.
Seth Green was so great in this scene.
Very well.
Where do I begin?
This scene was way longer.
It was like three times as long and this
speech at one point was all improvised.
but we had to cut down for time.
My mother was a 15-year-old French
prostitute named Chloe with webbed feet.
My father would womanize. he would drink.
he would make outrageous...
This story is just... This was written in
the very first draft and then it
constantly got rewritten over and over
again.
And it just... I don't know. it just came.
Just was one of those things where I just
started. you know. talking.
My childhood was typical.
Summers in Rangoon. luge lessons.
I love all the daisies in the background
and stuff.
When I was insolent. I was placed in a
burlap bag and beaten with reeds.
We wanted to have the world be as normal
and sort of 30-something as possible so
that the contrast of Dr. Evil
and who he was in his
underground diabolical chamber
would be as great as possible.
So the perfect setting seemed to be an
elementary school that had been converted
for the weekend into a father-son
counseling session.
Austin. can I have a word with you?
Of course you may. love.
Look. I know I'm being neurotic.
but I can't shake off this suspicious
feeling about that Italian secretary.
you know. Miss Vagina.
I don't want to sound
paranoid. but I've had some
bad relationships in
the past and I have to...
Again. this was one of those
choices where you could dress
her up in a kind of real slinky
lingerie thing of some sort.
But the choice was to go with this sort of
man's pajamas look. which on someone like
Elizabeth was just way sexier and also
adorable at the same time.
Of course.
I have a nine millimeter automatic.
You know I meant. did you use a condom?
No.
Only sailors use condoms. baby.
Not in the 90s. Austin.
Well. they should. those filthy beggars.
They go from port to port.
Well. Vanessa. don't have a thrombo.
A lotto meant nothing to me.
Well. it means something to me.
We felt like it would
be great to see Austin
get a slap once and
then feel the sting of it.
And throughout this next little sequence.
you really get a sense that Austin is
suffering a little for being such a
misfit.
It's not really a fish out of water story
so much as it is a guy who brings the
crazy colored water with him to the land
and to this era.
But this is one place where he really is
completely on thin ice. to mix metaphors.
and sort of floundering a little bit.
And that vulnerability. again.
really helped the character. I think.
Now. when you said flounder. you meant
that to sound fish-like. right?
Because I don't think he's a fish out of
water.
I think he's a sexual moray out of water.
And by moray. I mean both eel and norm.
Thank you.
Thanks for clarifying.
I don't know.
This was originally going to be Austin
drinking Zima.
It was going to be that he's trying to fit
in so he has a Zima.
But they wouldn't let us.
Because they kind of quickly figured out
that we were making fun of Zima.
At first they were like. great.
Zima in the movie. that'll be wonderful.
And then you realize that he's kind of
like an idiot trying to fit in.
Oh. well.
They're too smart. these people.
In my day. product
placement people didn't know
the context with which
their product was used.
I had. at the end of the scene. I had
flour in my nostrils for like four months.
I was having like little pastry boogers
come out of me.
I felt like the guy from Pop and Fresh.
The little Pillsbury guy.
There was literally a
gun. an air gun of great
power and force right
off to the side of the tent.
Shooting flour up into my nasal passage.
I still think there's like a croissant up
there.
Yeah. and I can't believe Liberace was
gay.
And then women loved him.
I didn't see that one coming.
I didn't know.
This is Patrick Bristow. a great comedian.
Another Groundlings guy.
He's also on Ellen.
The joke here that I always liked was that
there's a tour through this building.
but you never see anything.
It literally goes from the front door of
the lobby to the back end of the lobby.
To the gift shop.
And that's like a three second tour.
There you go. everyone.
All right. thanks.
Bye.
Buy something at the gift shop.
I just love that everything in the 90s now
has a gift shop and merchandising.
including the legitimate face of an evil
empire.
It's a theme park of a lobby of a business
building.
Oh. God.
What are we going to do?
We don't have anything like our photo
badges.
Don't worry. baby.
I learned a mind control technique during
my travels to India.
I learned it from my guru. the late Guru
Shastri. a chaste man who died
mysteriously of a disease that had all the
hallmarks of syphilis.
All right. watch me.
Hi. folks.
You're entering a restricted zone.
I'm going to have to see some
identification. please.
Sure.
Seems to be some sort of problem.
Everything seems to be in order.
That's fantastic. Austin.
Come on. let's go.
I'm going to go across the street and get
you some orange sherbet.
Austin. let's go.
Here. have a piece of gum.
Don't mind if I do.
Austin. let's get out.
It's Bolton.
I just thought there should be a steamroller
testing facility within VirtuaCon.
We wanted to play
around a little bit with the
scale. sort of like in
Broadway Danny Roseman.
They go into the warehouse and have the
fight around the big helium Macy's parade.
What's that parade called?
Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade.
This next shot is great.
I love this shot.
No!
Watch out!
This was an idea by a friend of mine.
Steve Hibbert.
He gave me this joke of the idea of a
high-speed chase only done on steamrollers.
Yes. this is Mrs. Harwin.
Yes. my husband is the henchman in Dr.
Evil's private army.
What?
Oh my God!
Thanks for calling.
Sit down. Billy.
I've got some bad news.
Your stepfather was run over by a
steamroller.
But Mom. since Dad left. he's been like a
father to me.
People never think how things affect the
family of a henchman.
Oh.
thank goodness you made it. Austin.
All right. stay very cool. baby.
Every underground lair has to have a
secret entrance... in the mountains.
This was a generating station that we were
told would not be on during filming.
And. of course. there
was this terrible heat wave.
and so it was on the
entire time we were filming.
And I think we all got noise pollution
during this.
Because it was like a 60-cycle hum at
about 130 decibels.
So every piece of this dialogue is dubbed.
because it's just this sound going...
Everybody off camera is wearing
construction hats and earplugs.
and the actors had to keep working.
Again. paging Dr. Freud.
Not now. Austin.
So powerful it can penetrate the Earth's
crust.
Overly explanatory maps.
It's one of Mike's favorite jokes.
Yes.
I love unnecessary exposition.
And. of course. me explaining that was
unnecessary exposition.
It seems we have no choice but to pay your
ransom.
At one time there was this great long
speech by Michael York. talking about what
would happen if the volcanoes actually
ever were allowed to erupt. and how...
It was like 18 minutes long.
And it was such a drag
to cut it out. because it
was the most incredible
and passionate performance.
But it was unfortunately
sort of... it didn't fit within the
structure of the scene. but it
was an amazing performance.
It would be like a great separate movie
unto itself.
This was another happy accident with this
rolling chair.
Mike found that if he just sat back in it
a little bit. it would drift like 30 feet.
Because in rehearsal we were trying to set
the shot. and every time I sat down.
it would slide like 40 feet.
And so we thought we'd just leave it in.
Half the time when you're working on the
schedule and budget that this film had.
and trying to accomplish so much.
you just. you know. you would find
something funny that would happen. and
you'd just milk it for all it was worth.
Because the minute you knew it was funny.
and that you didn't have time to shoot a
lot of other stuff that
was planned. you would
just. you know.
shoot the hell out of it.
And we did.
And some of the best stuff in these scenes
was improvised.
The whole shushing thing that's coming up
was something that Mike discovered on the
day. and I just loved it and shot it from
every possible angle.
I like the subtext that Frau Farbison is
really Scott's mom.
Or that they're lovers.
I can't decide.
I like to think that they're lovers.
I have a lot of problems.
I wonder if it's clear to people that the
clothes you and Elizabeth are wearing in
this scene were supposed to have been
designed by Dr. Evil.
I think we have that
line still in the head of the
scene. but I want to
draw special attention to it.
It fit the color scheme of Dr. Evil's
world.
The chrome and black marble.
Gray.
All right. let's begin.
Dr. Evil. do you really expect...
This is right out of James Bond.
Do you expect them to pay?
No. Mr. Bond. I expect them to die.
I expect them to die.
I always love that there's a slow-moving
dipping mechanism.
And that they don't check.
And they put them in easily escapable
situations.
We wanted to steal one other thing from
the Bond films.
I always wanted to put a rear projection
thing of sharks swimming around underneath
that pond and make it look
like a kind of rear projection
process shot that he just
had in his lair all the time.
But it would actually have nothing to do
with the tank.
Behind where you're sitting in a totally
separate place.
With scratches in the film.
Again. a lot of this whole
thing of the lair not working and
stuff. I owe to Jack Handy
who lent it to me for this movie.
The great writer who worked on Saturday
Night Live and does all the deep thoughts.
What was the original sequence?
It was going to be. you know. open the
tank. you're surrounded by sharks with
lasers and then it was going to be
piranhas with lasers.
But they were too heavy so they sank to
the bottom.
And then it got the sea bass.
And originally we were going to have
actual sharks with actual lasers.
But we couldn't afford it.
So we just talked about them.
And we just used bubbles.
And we made it sea bass.
We used bubbles with a hose that was
straight out of You Only Live Twice.
The underground lair had
a kind of a bridge over a
tank and bubbles just
came whenever the dead lift.
It was so low tech.
We loved that.
We originally were going to actually have
sharks with laser beams.
But I actually thought
the bubbles were
ultimately funnier because
they were so low tech.
Boom!
I'll blow their brains out.
Scott. you just don't get it.
That was a big part of the experience of
making the film is embracing low tech for
its own sake and trying to have fun with
it.
This was way longer too.
Early in the process this got a good reaction
and we had it be four times its length.
But that was outrageously too long.
There is like 15 minutes of me doing that.
On film at least.
Reels and reels.
And you always hear
the crew step on your lines
because they are
laughing so hard through it.
At one time that scene
started with a big jello brain that
you can still see from time
to time in the wide shots.
We had a joke and just never played.
There is always room for jello.
Never played. never got a laugh.
You try sometimes to hope a laugh into
existence.
This stunt guy was awesome.
He was upside down in that water for
almost three minutes or something.
It's like Johnny Weissmuller.
When his head got bitten off.
There you go ladies and gentlemen.
That's our version of somebody decapitated
right there.
I think that dummy cost about 45 cents.
Something like that.
There were scenes in
the movie where you would
zoom into the body of the
henchman who was killed.
Then you would go to the henchman's house.
And the wife would receive
the phone call that. you
know. yes. my husband
is a henchman for Dr. Evil.
What?
Decapitated?
Decapitated by ill-tempered mutated sea
bass?
Oh my God.
And then the son comes in.
Where's dad?
He was decapitated by ill-tempered mutated
sea bass.
Oh no.
And try and have the actual impact of a
henchman's death on a henchman's family.
But it went away.
Something that may sound a little sappy.
I think it is such a tribute
to our buddy John Smith
that so many of his friends
showed up to honor him today.
There's a lot of love in this room.
Hi.
I have a phone call for the John Smith
party.
I'll get it.
He's dead?
Decapitated by an ill-tempered mutated sea
bass?
Yes.
Okay.
What's wrong?
What happened?
Was that John?
Is he coming late?
John Smith won't be coming.
Why not?
He was decapitated by an ill-tempered
mutated sea bass.
Oh my God.
Are you kidding me?
To Smitty.
No. what are we going to do?
Oh. look. there's an emergency exit.
Go get help.
I'm going to stay here and keep an eye on
Dr. Evil.
Okay. I'll hurry back.
Listen. Vanessa.
Whatever happens. I want you to know that
I feel really bad about that Italian bird.
This was an underwater...
This was another filtration plant.
We were in two filtration plants.
This was the drinking water processing
place over in the North Valley.
And there was always the danger of ozone
leaks.
And so all along the hallways are
stretchers.
And it was a little scary
shooting in a place where there's
a need for stretchers
every ten feet on the hallway.
Yeah. don't worry. it's never happened.
But should it happen. you die within five
minutes.
But it's never happened.
It's a great location to know all these
pipes running down these long hallways.
We did this in two takes.
That's right.
Come. everyone.
Let us prepare to the main chamber.
Project Vulcan is about to begin.
Scott. don't you want to see what Daddy
does for a living?
Blow me.
Excuse me?
The idea that even Dr. Evil has problems
with his adolescent son has cracked me up.
Yes. we did have to lift the cart into
that position.
We were told not to bang the walls.
We would take big. huge hunks out of the
wall.
They got really pissed.
We were told that we
were jeopardizing the entire
water supply of six million
people in Los Angeles.
By putting a Nick in the wall.
But. you know. the shot was important.
Bring in the warheads.
I also love. too. that there was that
whole missile that was supposed to come.
and the missile never came.
We're going to shoot.
We had a whole sequence with a big. long
missile. and all we got was the warhead.
So we had to improvise.
I just love. how does that happen.
you know?
Oh. no. no. the missile is not showing up
today.
Oh. well. I guess we don't get a missile
in the movie.
This set was pretty incredible.
that rotating fireplace.
You never quite get to
see the whole rotation of it.
but the fireplace is
replaced by the fembot lair.
That's Cindy Margolis. that fembot on the
left.
The Internet pinup queen had more Internet
downloads.
Of her. I believe. without a costume.
No. she's actually always wearing
swimsuits.
Is that right?
She's a pinup girl with swimsuits.
She's not pornographic.
Paging Dr. Freud.
Now. if you think about it. that drill
kind of looks like a penis.
The suit was from Dr. No.
And we could only shoot in it for.
like. four minutes. and then I'd have to
be cut out of it. because otherwise I
would suffocate.
His makeup would
literally melt. and all the
rubber prosthetics on his
face would start melting.
It was so hot inside that thing.
Give it up. Mr. Powers.
This was a hard day of shooting.
Actually. it was really hard.
All that hair and those costumes.
It was impossible to get them all on the
set at the same time.
It was very difficult.
I know it's a tough job.
but... Someone has to do it.
Glad you said that. Mike.
You can't resist us. Mr. Powers.
This is a fun scene where I get my mojo
started. by the way.
To get cross-mojo-nation.
This was a hard day.
It was a tricky day. because we had to
shoot...
Because the Fembot costumes were so
complex. we had to shoot Mike separately
from them. and they weren't ever on the
set when he was.
So it was always cause-effect.
cause-effect. cause-effect. and we never
knew exactly what cause was gonna go with
what effect.
But ultimately. our editor. Debbie Neal.
did an amazing job having his moves and
his gestures sync up with the reactions
from the Fembots.
Again. I might like to stress that that
hair...
By the end of this. cause I did so many
takes. started to stink so bad.
It was like literally having roadkill on
your chest.
And there's no padding. as well.
Just so you know. that's all me.
Mike has this impact on women in real
life. too. I've seen it.
This was the reprise of her mom's leather
catsuit. fight suit. which we thought was
a good character arc. bookend sort of
thing. that she had...
And we also just wanted to see her in a
leather suit.
Let's be honest. Jake.
Come on. we're not idiots.
How was that?
You got Elizabeth Hurley... I know. you're
trying to say it like it was an arc thing.
You got Elizabeth Hurley. put on the suit.
please.
Thank you very much.
But she fulfilled her destiny as her mom's
daughter.
Yeah. and she put on the suit.
Jake.
Come on.
Let's not fool the people.
Smashing baby.
Let's not lie to the people.
It's interesting that both actresses asked
to keep those suits.
Launching the subterranean probe.
Begin initial surface penetration.
This thing weighed something like 40 tons.
Did it really?
It was so heavy. it was hooked to the
crane that was designed to move those
generators around. that big
ceiling crane that went back and
forth. and that's the only way
we could lower it into position.
That was the biggest blast.
Oh. my God.
And the gaff squad people will notice
that. although it was painted to resemble
a steel door. that wood starts flying out
of it when it explodes.
Chunks of wood flew all over the place.
stuck into the walls.
I just thought it was important that
people just blow up.
Like in every shootout in all these
movies. people. you throw a grenade and
they get thrown 50 feet
into the air. as opposed to
just getting like a ton of
fragments into their body.
Mike and Elizabeth are shooting from this
place. and you don't see the guys
off-screen shooting. but they're
shooting full automatic weapons
with hot shells raining down
on top of Mike and Elizabeth.
Of course. nobody told us.
I was scared.
I soiled myself during that sequence.
because those things are loud.
I'd never used a gun before. either.
That's the six million dollar man
adjustment there. with the slow motion.
No!
I do like Meow Mix.
Now. here's the only shot in the movie
where Mike appears in both characters
simultaneously in the same shot. which
we. of course. did with a film optical.
The rest of the time. we used body
doubles.
Free love. swinging. parties. are all
now...
This was always a bit of a controversial
scene. too. because now that he's saved
the world. some might argue
that the best thing to do would
be to get to the end of the
movie as quickly as possible.
But the speech here that Austin delivers
seemed to. in a somewhat light-hearted
way. articulate the theme of the whole
film.
But it was always one of my favorite
speeches. and I can't hear it without
smiling. even though it's pretty on the
nose about what the film's about.
But that's sort of in character of the
movie. too.
That's what I always like about movies.
When the bad guy and the good guy get
together. they always tell each other
their philosophy before they kill each
other.
Before I kill you. I want to tell you that
I believe in tea.
I think tea is good. as opposed to coffee.
That's my philosophy.
There's always time for that. too.
As desperate and urgent as everything else
is.
Long-winded political speeches before
they... because in reality. you should
just go up to the guy and blow his brains
out.
But no. I'm going to tell you about land
reform.
It seems the tables have turned again.
Dr. Evil.
Not really.
Kill the little bastard.
At one point. there was a line where I go.
oh. don't say that.
That hurts Daddy's feelings.
What about last night?
Two hours of hop-on-pop. which is a Dr.
Seuss thing.
But everybody thought that hop-on-pop was
some sort of weird sex thing.
Nobody. for some reason. remembered
hop-on-pop.
Go ahead.
Take Mr. Powers away.
The observant here
will notice that number
two is escaping with a
fembot in his suitcase.
I spent 30 years of my
life turning this two-bit
evil empire into a
world-class multinational.
I was going to have a cover story in
four...
I'm such a nerd. I was just happy to hold
a machine gun that day.
Because I'm such a World War II fan.
especially that type of European.
like commando. machine gun.
Silence number two!
This was Robert Wagner's idea.
to cry.
This is a classic moment.
He said. Mike. I'd like to cry.
He didn't tell me about it either.
He didn't rehearse it this way.
And on the first take. we
all just like... Cracked up.
We had to really control ourselves to keep
from laughing.
And he just did it like that every take.
It was such a girly cry. too.
It was so funny.
Look at me squinting away as I shoot.
I'm from Canada.
We have gun control.
I'm not used to that.
I like shaky cam.
Nobody ever questions how that egg shows
up in a psychedelic club or here.
I love that it just appears and takes off
whenever Dr. Evil needs it.
I like.
the notion of shaky cam selling explosion.
This is really Mission Impossible in here.
That's a nice shot.
I made this shot.
This was not at Rim of Fire or the Valley
of Fire.
This was at Vasquez Rocks in L.A.
Cheeky.
I love that we used stock
footage here with the most
possible scratches and
the biggest possible grain.
I know.
It looks like Super 8 that I took in the
60s.
They got married.
Get it?
One time there was talk of a line about
how Austin had fixed his teeth.
Look at the glue. Jay.
Look at the glue.
I know.
You can see the glue on his left tit
there.
I'm telling you. she kept doing that and I
kept saying. I'm telling you. it's going
to come off in your head since she got so
grossed out.
Hello. Austin.
This was all done pretty
much without monitors because
you couldn't really see
the monitors that well.
No.
So Mike kind of was just winging this
blocking and actually did a great job.
This was all about timing all these gags
and both actors nailed it.
It took a lot less time to shoot this second
time around because we knew the trick.
Nice rack.
But who in the world...
I love that joke.
Well. as you know. Dr. Evil
has escaped in his rocket.
which has disappeared
from our tracking system.
Oh. dear.
Hold on.
Elizabeth has a peculiar situation in her
life that photographs of her with even
slightly revealing aspects can be sold for
a ton of money.
So we taped bright
red gaffers tape over her
naughty bits in the
taping of this scene.
Little pieces. but in case there happened
to be an accidental reveal. nobody could
then somehow pirate the footage and sell
it in England to the tabloids.
Thanks. Brazel.
I think I'm going to like living in the
90s.
Bye-bye.
Goodbye.
You know. Vanessa...
You know. this is very... this whole
scene reminds me a lot of... I grew up...
you know. my dad was from Liverpool.
England. and we watched a lot of English
comedies. and this
reminds me a lot of. like.
the Benny Hill stuff
that I saw as a kid.
I like the little happy face.
Did you feel the same way?
Actually. I couldn't stop staring at your
teeth.
In this case. we moved the camera to all
different angles during the scene as
opposed to the first one. which was all
done from one stationary camera angle.
Because at that time. we were
trying to do it all in one take.
and in this one. we knew we
would be doing it in coverage.
Looks like he ordered sole.
By sole. I mean both the shoe and the
fish.
And here comes... the penis pump.
The flag of Sweden.
They tell you that it's Swedish.
Honestly. it's not mine!
No. use it.
Now. I'm guessing that's how the penis
pump works. because I've never used one.
but I'm sure that's how it works.
right?
The guys at Digital Sound and Picture who
did the soundtrack for us came up with
this idea about an inflating balloon
sound. like a squeaking balloon sound.
and you can hear it on the track as he's
pumping it up.
Always makes me mad.
Look how beautiful the night sky is.
I never tire of a Uranus joke.
Yeah. and that looks just like Uranus.
Austin!
Well. you know.
Hey. I've never seen that big star before.
You can really see how far she came in her
look and demeanor throughout the film.
Her character actually made a huge arc.
Yeah. you're still trying to justify the
fight suit.
I'm not buying it. chief.
See. I have a snot-sicle.
You see that on my left nostril?
And there's a little dummy of Ted Nugent.
That's not the real cat.
We didn't introduce the real cat.
That's not the original The End.
We changed that.
See how interesting we are?
Stay tuned.
Don't turn it off yet.
There's stuff coming up during the
credits.
Like footage on the left.
See. there.
We weren't lying.
This was originally in the body of the
movie. in the getting to know you.
getting to know all about you phase of
their relationship.
And then. again. for time. we cut it out
and put it in the end credits.
as you can see.
It used to be that while they were doing
the surveillance with the big camera.
he would look over and see how beautiful
she was.
And then she would pretend to be quite...
well. she would be shy about the camera.
But since it was Elizabeth Hurley.
we thought it would be really funny to cut
to her in full-on gowns and everything.
doing the photo shoot.
The consummate supermodel thing.
But it actually turned out to be sort
of more meaningful in terms of their...
here we go on
the arc thing again.
But in terms of the arc of the
relationship. to show her with Austin
after he'd saved the world and they'd
gotten married and now she was his model.
And he's now taking photographs of her the
way he did all the 60s models.
But as Mike said.
probably just a good excuse
to get her in a lot of
really great gowns.
I don't know what that costume was.
It was always this idea that there was a
certain amount of design in the 60s that
had to be so over-the-top that it went way
beyond functionality.
And that you could actually make a dress
where the sleeve was sewn into the dress.
That's cracked me up.
This is sort of an homage to Blow Up as
well. the movie.
The Antonioni masterpiece Blow Up.
This entire sequence
was shot in one day
simultaneously with
shooting several other scenes.
We just would wait for Elizabeth to get
changed into a new costume.
While we were waiting we'd go off and
shoot things for the eight screen opticals
in the beginning of the movie or some
other scene.
So we couldn't really wait for scripted
lines.
We had to just make up what was going on.
And Mike just ran around
and shot pictures and
came up with really funny
stuff throughout the day.
Let me ask you. Jay. that topless part.
that's part of her arc. right?
She's topless because of the arc.
right?
Her character arc does actually reveal
itself there as she's finally liberated by...
Yes. it's liberation.
It's the arc.
That's why she's topless.
I'm with you. Jay.
It makes total sense.
That's why she's on the ground.
topless.
It's the arc.
Honestly.
I have to justify all the money I spent in
film school somehow.
That's right.
Whip out the arc where...
That bikini girl. that's part of her arc.
To be in the bikini.
Because originally
you'll see her in the
background in the movie
and now she's liberated.
This is the band Ming T that I used to
perform with.
I still do around Los Angeles.
It's Matthew Sweet on
bass. Susannah Hoffs
on guitar. Christopher
Ward on rhythm guitar.
And Stuart Johnson on drums.
And we've performed and we may be
performing in a town near you.
Jay.
I know it's your wife. but she looks
pretty hot there. you gotta be honest.
I don't mean to make you uncomfortable.
but that's part of her arc.
Is that she looks hot in the video.
Because in the start of the video she's
like in dark. see?
And then we cut in closer and she looks
like. you know. sexier.
Because that's her arc.
There she is arcing away in the
background.
Just arcing a storm.
Arcing madly.
And that's the end of the movie.
I hope you enjoyed our little
presentation.
My name is Mike Myers.
And I'm Jay Roach.
We had fun making it.
And we had fun talking about it.
Bye!
Bye everybody!